---
layout: post
title:  The Bali programming language
categories: Programming
tags: Java Languages
---

Bali is an alternative language for the JVM that shares Java semantics but with a better 
syntax. The name comes from the small island right to the east of Java.

Ok, Bali isn't a programming language, at least it is not an existing programming language. It
is only a desire of a Java programmer that fell in love with Scala in his middle age crisis.

At the beggining Java was great, you didn't have to take care of the memory, the API was very
complete and documented, it ran unmodified in different environments and the tools were
good... But time passes and you start seeing other languages in a different way.

Java is not as appealing as she was when she was young. Of course she is now more mature and
has improved over the years (generics, enums and lambdas are good proofs), but others start to
catch your eye.

The problem is that you shared a lot of things with Java, you planned your future with her 
and you know her deep inside. You don't want to throw all that to the thrash can and start
from scratch again!

Anyway, the thrill of trying new things is hard and you start flirting with other languages.
Scala, Groovy, Ruby, Python but most of them are dynamic (with its good things, and bad
things) so they don't completely replace Java.

Oracle should be aware that a lot of developers consider changing language (not platform)
because it evolves slow and it is very verbose (slow to develop with). But adapting Java is
slow and should be done with care because there are a lot of code and  tools to support.

They could avoid that situation creating a new programming language which shares the same
Java semantics but more appealing to develop with.

If they do, most of developers trying to find an alternative would consider their proposal
(because they trust Oracle) so they keep platform control, and it will be less fragmented.

It is important to note that if Oracle itself develop this language, tool vendors and
middleware developers would support it better than if it is developed by other company (only
because they are the owners of the Java Platform).

No other JVM language has had a massive adoption (each of them for their own reasons) but if
Oracle itself provides an alternative, lots of programmers considering changing wouldn't do.

These are the things I would value in this language:

* __Don't rely on filesystem structure (directories and file names):__ you end up with a lot of 
files and nested directories even for the smallest projects. Bali could support a flat packages
layout. Ie:

    org.example.pack1/               // Allow the use directories with dots instead nested ones
    org.example.pack1.subpack/
    org.example.pack2/
    org.example.pack3.bali           // Allow to use a file to hold all package classes

This way you can start coding a package in a file, and split it in a directory __only__ when it
grows.

* __More than one public class per file:__ Related to the previous one scale as you need, start
small and split in different files when needed (no more twenty line classes in their own 
file)... My editor is gonna run out of tabs!

* __Getters and setters as fields:__ allow to define `getters` as `<Type> $name ()` and
`setters` as `void $name (<Type> newVal)` allowing methods with these patterns to be accessed
as fields. This way you scale functionaly by not having to change client code (class users) if
you change a field by a method or the opposite. Ie:
you can start with a final field and after that change that for a `getter/setter` pair without
changing all clients. For example:

```java
class Person {
    private String name;

    public String $name () {
        return name;
    }
    
    public void $name (String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}

class Main {
    public static void main (String [] args) {
        Person p = new Person ();
        p.name = "Elmo";
    }
}
```

* __Multiline strings:__ this would be very useful for writing JDBC queries or embedded XML.
An example worths one thousand words:

```java
String s = """
  select *
  from persons
  where age > 18
""";
```

* __Default and named params:__ this would save a lot of overloaded methods. It would also
ease the creation of inmutable objects. And lastly, it could improve DSLs creation.

```java
class Car {
    public final String brand, model;
    public final int year;
  
    Car (String brand, String model, int year = 2000) {
        this.brand = brand;
        this.model = model;
        this.year = year;
    }
    
    static Car build () {
        return new Car (
            brand: "ford",
            model: "focus"
        );
    }
}
```

* __Remove semicolon whenever is possible:__ no need to say anymore :)

----

* __Last lambda outside parens__:

```java
build ("Widget", evt -> {
    evt.toString ();
});

build ("Widget") (evt) -> {
    evt.toString ();
}

build ("Widget") () -> {
    evt.toString ();
}
```

* __`===` operator as same instance and `==` as equals:__

* `?.` safe navigation... no more nested ifs (a != null)

* Elvis `?:` operator

* Override (not define) operators. ie: `$equals` > `==` `$same` > `===`

----

* __Markdown in Javadoc__: this way it would be easier to maintain the code documented ;)

With these changes, the language would be compatible and would be an evolution, 
not revolution to Java. The language could be a proving ground to test new additions to Java.

I was a one programming language man until now, I cheated Java with Scala. Anyway among all
languages you have for the JVM, none of them are just a faster (to write programs) Java.

And you, what improvements would you do to the Java language?

