---
layout: post
title:  The Bali programming language
categories: Programming
tags: Java Languages
---

Bali is an alternative language for the JVM that shares Java semantics but with a better 
syntax. The name comes from the small island right to the east of Java.

Ok, Bali isn't a programming language, at least it is not an existing programming language. It
is only a desire from a Java programmer that fell in love with Scala in his middle age crisis.

At the beggining Java was great, you didn't have to take care of the memory, the API was very
complete and documented, it ran unmodified in different environments and the tools were
good... But time passes and you start seeing other languages in a different way.

Java is not as appealing as she was when she was young. Of course she is now more mature, has
improved over the years (generics, enums and lambdas are good proofs), but others start to
catch your eye.

The problem is that you shared a lot of things with Java, you planned your future with her 
and know her deep inside. And you don't want to throw all that to the thrash can and start
from scratch again!

Anyway, the thrill of trying new things is hard and you start flirting with other languages.
Scala, Groovy, Ruby, Python but most of them are dynamic (with its good things, and bad
things).

Oracle should be aware that a lot of developers consider changing language (not platform)
because it evolves slow and it is very verbose (slow to develop with).

Changing Java is slow and should be done with care because there are a lot of code and tools
to support.

They could avoid that situation creating a new programming language which shares the same
Java semantics but more appealing to develop with.

If they do, most of developers trying to find an alternative would consider their proposal
(because they trust Oracle) so they keep platform control, it will be less fragmented.

No other Java platform language has had a massive adoption (each of them for their own reasons)
but if Oracle itself provides an alternative, lots of programmers considering changing
wouldn't do. These are the things I would value in this language:

- Don't rely on filesystem (dirs and file names) you end up with a lot of nested directories
and files even for the smallest projects. They could support a flat packages layout. ie
org.example.pack1/
org.example.pack1.subpack/
org.example.pack2/
org.example.pack3.java

Do not enforce filesystem rules! they are cumbersome and we are not small kids, we have to
structure the code by ourselves, not by other rules!
Yes more complicated

- More than 1 public class per file. Related to the previous one scale as you need, start
small and split in different files when needed (no more 20 line classes in their own file)...
My editor is gonna run out of tabs!

- Getter Setters with $name as fields. This way you scale functionality by not having to change
client code (class users) you can start with a final field, change to a mutable one (well...
if you think is better) and after that have methods

public String $name () {
  return name;
}

public void $name (String aName) {
  name = aName;
}

- Multiline strings

String s = """
  string
    indented by first line
""";

- Default and named params

class Car {
  Car (String brand, String model, int year = 2000) {
  }
  
  static Car build () {
    return new Car (
      brand: "ford",
      model: "focus"
    );
  }
}

- Remove semicolon whenever is possible

- Last lambda outside parens

build ("Widget", evt -> {
  evt.toString ();
});

build ("Widget") (evt) -> {
  evt.toString ();
}

build ("Widget") () -> {
  evt.toString ();
}

- Lambda with one param implicit

- === operator as same instance, == as equals

- ?. safe navigation... no more nested ifs (a != null)
- and Elvis ?: operator

- override (not define) operators. ie: $equals > == $same > ===

- Markdown in Javadoc. please!!!!

With these changes, the language would be compatible and will be an evolution, 
not revolution to Java. A proving ground to test additions in Java.

What other small changes would you do to Java?

I was a one programming language man until now, I cheated Java with Scala, anyway from all
options you have inside the Java platform, none of them are just a faster (to write programs)
Java (except Xtend). Scala is a different thing

